[Music]
from the ancient times of human
civilization to this very day we've
always looked up at the stars with an
unwavering desire to know what's out
there we've come a long way especially
with advanced space technology on our
side but the universe still leaves us
with more questions than answers like
what is that mysterious thing glowing in
the center of our galaxy it all started
around 10 years ago when NASA launched
the Fermi gamma-ray Space Telescope this
wasn't your standard point-and-shoot
telescope it's such an advanced piece of
equipment that it literally opened a
huge window on the universe allowing us
to see things we wouldn't have been able
to otherwise you might remember learning
about the electromagnetic spectrum in
school you've got the weakest radio
waves on the far left visible light
that's what the human eye can see in the
middle and the strongest gamma rays on
the far right so when you observe the
sky through a gamma-ray telescope rather
than with your own eyes you'd be looking
at a totally different picture when the
astronomers started getting data back
from the Fermi telescope they noticed
that the center of our galaxy was
emitting a lot more gamma radiation than
say it's outskirts to put it simply
something is glowing incredibly bright
right in the middle of the Milky Way but
the most perplexing thing is that no one
has been able to find an exact
explanation for this phenomenon for
nearly a decade sure there have been
several theories from the very beginning
some scientists hope that the mysterious
glow is somehow connected to the long
sought after an enigmatic
dark matter this stuff's existence has
been theorized for years and scientists
are pretty much certain that it exists
even more so they say it makes up about
27% of the entire universe for
comparison ordinary matter like what
makes up everything here on earth
adds up to only 5% of the universe's
composition if you're wondering about
the remaining 68% that would be dark
energy which oversees the fast growth of
the universe but dark energy is a topic
for a whole nother video for now let's
get back to this dark matter business
there's a theory that it works as a sort
of glue that keeps things together
thanks to this sticky stuff galaxies
don't split apart stars don't collide
with one another and our earth doesn't
stray off its orbit into open space
let's put that in a language that anyone
can understand pizza imagine the crust
is dark energy the pepperoni mushrooms
and all the toppings are ordinary matter
in galaxy clusters the goopy melted
cheese holding it all in place that's
dark matter
oh and by calling it dark matter
scientists aren't talking about the
color they just mean that this space
phenomenon doesn't emit either any
radiation or light visible to the human
eye also matter if you understand this
word like a substance doesn't mean that
you can touch dark matter if you ever
find it it just behaves like the matter
you as well as everything around you are
made of for example it has the same
gravitational pull as ordinary matter
dark energy however doesn't behave this
way anyway let's go back to the glowing
gamma rays in the heart of our galaxy
what does this have to do with all that
talk about dark matter well some
astronomers suppose that the central
region of the Milky Way was glowing with
such intensity because dark matter was
getting destroyed there well nobody has
ever observed this Dark Matter
annihilation scientists have been
hypothesizing about this phenomenon for
a long time naturally we wouldn't be
able to see dark matter itself but the
process could be producing the radiation
the gamma ray telescope spotted that's
why they got so excited that this could
be just the proof they needed here's the
theory if particles of dark matter
lighted just like ordinary matter
particles do in particle accelerators
they'd annihilate one another as a
result they'd burst in a shower of other
particles including the ones that make
up gamma rays but that's where the
problem lies
if the mystifying glow was created by
Dark Matter annihilation then gamma ray
particles would get distributed in space
evenly but the telescope showed them
gathering in clumps so to the great
disappointment of numerous supporters
the theory based on dark matter was
busted but there is an alternative
explanation of why the milky way is
glowing the culprit might be a group of
millisecond pulsars which are neutron
stars rotating really really fast that
is about a thousand times per second you
can't notice a separate pulsar since it
produces too little light but a group of
them is a different story let's delve a
bit deeper into the topic of pulsars
imagine a light house its job is to keep
ships and boats from crashing into the
rocks pulsars are the lighthouses of the
universe although not in the meaning
that they save spacecraft from collision
it's more in the fact that they emit
focused beams of radiation that you can
only see if you get in their path hence
the name of these neutron stars
they look like they're pulsating up
there in space when a supermassive star
with a mass equal to four to eight of
our Suns dies it either becomes a
supernova or turns into a black hole
with stars that are up to three times
the mass of the Sun aren't heavy enough
to do that that's why most of them end
up collapsing and turning into neutron
stars or pulsars after that happens the
former star becomes much smaller and as
a result its rotational speed grows so
dramatically that these space objects
start to spin unimaginably fast and how
about this the incredible density of
pulsars makes scientists believe that if
there was life on these stars it would
be two-dimensional like in a comic book
that's because the gravity there is so
strong
that it would flatten anything on its
surface on top of that it seems that
pulsars can have planets of their own
although it's unclear whether those are
original or the Pulsar just captured
them one day and pulled them away from
their orbits our Milky Way is home to
more than a billion neutron stars and
around 200,000 of them are pulsars if a
pulsar were to enter our solar system
one day it'd be a bad situation to say
the least
the spinning invader would wreak havoc
and chaos by throwing the planets off
their orbits probably pulling away one
or two of them it would also cause
unimaginably powerful tides that could
literally rip the earth apart and let's
not forget about its gamma radiation if
even one jet of radiation from a pulsar
hit our planet it would destroy the
whole ozone layer in a matter of minutes
and we need that ozone to keep this
planet warm and to protect it from
ultraviolet radiation coming from the
Sun so without it earth would be
uninhabitable good thing that's pretty
much an impossible scenario Oh first for
all that planet destroying stuff to
happen a pulsar we need to get
relatively close to Earth but the
closest neutron star we know of is still
500 light years away plus the Pulsar
would have to be lined up with our
planet in a way for its cataclysmic jet
of gamma radiation to reach us otherwise
it would miss so is that what's lighting
up the center of our Milky Way
the Pulsar theory is plausible like I
said before the glow coming from there
is clumpy rather than smooth that sort
of pattern often happens when the source
of the energy is one individual object
such as a pulsar several studies have
concluded that due to the nature of the
light millisecond pulsars
are the best explanation for this
phenomenon
but that doesn't mean all scientists are
convinced they state that these clumps
may be the result of the interaction of
gas between stars and cosmic rays
besides the Pulsar Theory has one more
catch why would so many of them be
clustered together in a perfect sphere
around the center of the galaxy it's
likely that the clusters of stars that
orbit the Milky Way could have been
disrupted by the galaxy's gravity and as
a result spilled some stars here and
there that could have included pulsars
that later formed a spherical shell
around the heart of the Milky Way but in
fact the whole picture looks like
something completely different from both
pulsars and dark matter so in the end
scientists are still left with more
questions than the answers and a lot
more researching to do for any
conclusive findings guess we'll just
have to wait and see now what in your
opinion is the source of the mysterious
glow in the center of the Milky Way let
me know down in the comments if you
learn something new today then give this
video a like and share it with a friend
but hey don't go ejecting your Dark
Matter just yet we have over 2,000 cool
videos for you to check out all you have
to do is pick the left or right video
click on it and enjoy stay on the bright
side of life
[Music]